AIM

Our aim is to improve the benefit that can be achieved from the use of the medical stroke treatment ('thrombolysis') which breaks down clots causing most strokes. 

BACKGROUND

Stroke is one of the leading causes of death and disability. Most strokes are caused by a clot in the brain. For these patients there is the possibility to break down the clot by use of thrombolysis. Thrombolysis use and speed varies a lot between hospitals, and the overall use is only about half of the NHS target. 

Our modelling has already identified some potential effects of the variation in treatment. One observation is that for people suffering a mild stroke, early use of thrombolysis appears to reduce the risk of death, but late use can increase the risk of death. This observation may be used to support a change in clinical practice. However, our current models are not the right type for us to state any *cause-and-effect* conclusions. To be able to confirm that early use of thrombolysis is actually causing the observed reduction in death we would use *causal inference analysis*. By extending our current work to using these new methods, we will strengthen our findings by ruling out any current observation being due to a coincidence.

DESIGN AND METHODS

Our models are based on the Sentinel Stroke National Audit Programme detailed stroke dataset. It contains a record for each patient that has had a stroke. No modelling method will be perfect for confirming a cause-and-effect relationship from routinely collected data. But by using a number of methods we can best test our observations in multiple ways. We will hold stakeholder workshops to help us develop the work. 

PATIENT AND PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT

We regularly discuss our work with an engaged group of patients and carers. This process has previously helped us to communicate the models and the results clearly, which in turn has improved our knowledge of the models. The patients and carers also guided our work to look more at what benefits patient outcomes, and not just about meeting arbitrary targets. 

LINK TO PATIENT BENEFIT

We  have strong direct links for how our findings will benefit patients. NHS-England will use our findings to support specific hospitals with their improvements, and the national stroke audit will incorporate our findings from spring 2024. The knowledge developed here will be used routinely in future projects.

DISSEMINATION

In addition to working through he national stroke audit and NHS-England, We will also publish our work in leading stroke journals, and present it at stroke conferences. All of our detailed work is published online for anyone to freely access and use.